## 1
The glory of the One who moves all things
permeates the universe and glows
in one part more and in another less.

I was within the heaven that receives
more of His light; and I saw things that he
who from that height descends, forgets or can

not speak; for nearing its desired end,
our intellect sinks into an abyss
so deep that memory fails to follow it.

Nevertheless, as much as I, within
my mind, could treasure of the holy kingdom
shall now become the matter of my song.

O good Apollo, for this final task
make me the vessel of your excellence,
what you, to merit your loved laurel, ask.

Until this point, one of Parnassus’ peaks
sufficed for me; but now I face the test
the agon that is left; I need both crests.

Enter into my breast; within me breathe
the very power you made manifest
when you drew Marsyas out from his limbs’ sheath.

O godly force, if you so lend yourself
to me, that I might show the shadow of
the blessed realm inscribed within my mind,

then you would see me underneath the tree
you love; there I shall take as crown the leaves
of which my theme and you shall make me worthy.

So seldom, father, are those garlands gathered
for triumph of a ruler or a poet—
a sign of fault or shame in human wills—

that when Peneian branches can incite
someone to long and thirst for them, delight
must fill the happy Delphic deity.

Great fire can follow a small spark: there may
be better voices after me to pray
to Cyrrha’s god for aid—that he may answer.

The lantern of the world approaches mortals
by varied paths; but on that way which links
four circles with three crosses, it emerges

joined to a better constellation and
along a better course, and it can temper
and stamp the world’s wax more in its own manner.

Its entry from that point of the horizon
brought morning there and evening here; almost
all of that hemisphere was white—while ours

was dark—when I saw Beatrice turn round
and left, that she might see the sun; no eagle
has ever stared so steadily at it.

And as a second ray will issue from the
first and reascend, much like a pilgrim
who seeks his home again, so on her action,

fed by my eyes to my imagination,
my action drew, and on the sun I set
my sight more than we usually do.

More is permitted to our powers there
than is permitted here, by virtue of
that place, made for mankind as its true home.

I did not bear it long, but not so briefly
as not to see it sparkling round about,
like molten iron emerging from the fire;

and suddenly it seemed that day had been
added to day, as if the One who can
had graced the heavens with a second sun.

The eyes of Beatrice were all intent
on the eternal circles; from the sun,
I turned aside; I set my eyes on her.

In watching her, within me I was changed
as Glaucus changed, tasting the herb that made
him a companion of the other sea gods.

Passing beyond the human cannot be
worded; let Glaucus serve as simile—
until grace grant you the experience.

Whether I only was the part of me
that You created last, You—governing
the heavens—know: it was Your light that raised me.

When that wheel which You make eternal through
the heavens’ longing for You drew me with
the harmony You temper and distinguish,

the fire of the sun then seemed to me
to kindle so much of the sky, that rain
or river never formed so broad a lake.

The newness of the sound and the great light
incited me to learn their cause—I was
more keen than I had ever been before.

And she who read me as I read myself,
to quiet the commotion in my mind,
opened her lips before I opened mine

to ask, and she began: “You make yourself
obtuse with false imagining; you can
not see what you would see if you dispelled it.

You are not on the earth as you believe;
but lightning, flying from its own abode,
is less swift than you are, returning home.”

While I was freed from my first doubt by these
brief words she smiled to me, I was yet caught
in new perplexity. I said: “I was

content already; after such great wonder,
I rested. But again I wonder how
my body rises past these lighter bodies.”

At which, after a sigh of pity, she
settled her eyes on me with the same look
a mother casts upon a raving child,

and she began: “All things, among themselves,
possess an order; and this order is
the form that makes the universe like God.

Here do the higher beings see the imprint
of the Eternal Worth, which is the end
to which the pattern I have mentioned tends.

Within that order, every nature has
its bent, according to a different station,
nearer or less near to its origin.

Therefore, these natures move to different ports
across the mighty sea of being, each
given the impulse that will bear it on.

This impulse carries fire to the moon;
this is the motive force in mortal creatures;
this binds the earth together, makes it one.

Not only does the shaft shot from this bow
strike creatures lacking intellect, but those
who have intelligence, and who can love.

The Providence that has arrayed all this
forever quiets—with Its light—that heaven
in which the swiftest of the spheres revolves;

to there, as toward a destined place, we now
are carried by the power of the bow
that always aims its shaft at a glad mark.

Yet it is true that, even as a shape
may, often, not accord with art’s intent,
since matter may be unresponsive, deaf,

so, from this course, the creature strays at times
because he has the power, once impelled,
to swerve elsewhere; as lightning from a cloud

is seen to fall, so does the first impulse,
when man has been diverted by false pleasure,
turn him toward earth. You should—if I am right—

not feel more marvel at your climbing than
you would were you considering a stream
that from a mountain’s height falls to its base.

It would be cause for wonder in you if,
no longer hindered, you remained below,
as if, on earth, a living flame stood still.”

Then she again turned her gaze heavenward


## 2


O you who are within your little bark,
eager to listen, following behind
my ship that, singing, crosses to deep seas,

turn back to see your shores again: do not
attempt to sail the seas I sail; you may,
by losing sight of me, be left astray.

The waves I take were never sailed before;
Minerva breathes, Apollo pilots me,
and the nine Muses show to me the Bears.

You other few who turned your minds in time
unto the bread of angels, which provides
men here with life—but hungering for more—

you may indeed commit your vessel to
the deep salt—sea, keeping your course within
my wake, ahead of where waves smooth again.

Those men of glory, those who crossed to Colchis,
when they saw Jason turn into a ploughman
were less amazed than you will be amazed.

The thirst that is innate and everlasting—
thirst for the godly realm—bore us away
as swiftly as the heavens that you see.

Beatrice gazed upward. I watched her.
But in a span perhaps no longer than
an arrow takes to strike, to fly, to leave

the bow, I reached a place where I could see
that something wonderful drew me; and she
from whom my need could not be hidden, turned

to me (her gladness matched her loveliness):
“Direct your mind to God in gratefulness,”
she said; “He has brought us to the first star.”

It seemed to me that we were covered by
a brilliant, solid, dense, and stainless cloud,
much like a diamond that the sun has struck.

Into itself, the everlasting pearl
received us, just as water will accept
a ray of light and yet remain intact.

If I was body (and on earth we can
not see how things material can share
one space—the case, when body enters body),

then should our longing be still more inflamed
to see that Essence in which we discern
how God and human nature were made one.

What we hold here by faith, shall there be seen,
not demonstrated but directly known,
even as the first truth that man believes.

I answered: “With the most devotion I
can summon, I thank Him who has brought me
far from the mortal world. But now tell me:

what are the dark marks on this planet’s body
that there below, on earth, have made men tell
the tale of Cain?” She smiled somewhat, and then

she said: “If the opinion mortals hold
falls into error when the senses’ key
cannot unlock the truth, you should not be

struck by the arrows of amazement once
you recognize that reason, even when
supported by the senses, has short wings.

But tell me what you think of it yourself.”
And I: “What seems to us diverse up here
is caused—I think—by matter dense and rare.”

And she: “You certainly will see that your
belief is deeply sunk in error if
you listen carefully as I rebut it.

The eighth sphere offers many lights to you,
and you can tell that they, in quality
and size, are stars with different visages.

If rarity and density alone
caused this, then all the stars would share one power
distributed in lesser, greater, or

in equal force. But different powers must
be fruits of different formal principles;
were you correct, one only would be left,

the rest, destroyed. And more, were rarity
the cause of the dim spots you question, then
in part this planet would lack matter through

and through, or else as, in a body, lean
and fat can alternate, so would this planet
alternate the pages in its volume.

To validate the first case, in the sun’s
eclipse, the light would have to show through, just
as when it crosses matter that is slender.

This is not so; therefore we must consider
the latter case—if I annul that too,
then your opinion surely is confuted.

If rarity does not run through and through
the moon, then there must be a limit where
thickness does not allow the light to pass;

from there, the rays of sun would be thrown back,
just as, from glass that hides lead at its back,
a ray of colored light returns, reflected.

Now you will say that where a ray has been
reflected from a section farther back,
that ray will show itself to be more dim.

Yet an experiment, were you to try it,
could free you from your cavil—and the source
of your arts’ course springs from experiment.

Taking three mirrors, place a pair of them
at equal distance from you; set the third
midway between those two, but farther back.

Then, turning toward them, at your back have placed
a light that kindles those three mirrors and
returns to you, reflected by them all.

Although the image in the farthest glass
will be of lesser size, there you will see
that it must match the brightness of the rest.

Now, just as the sub—matter of the snow,
beneath the blows of the warm rays, is stripped
of both its former color and its cold,

so is your mind left bare of error; I
would offer now to you a new form, light
so living that it trembles in your sight.

Within the heaven of the godly peace
revolves a body in whose power lies
the being of all things that it enfolds.

The sphere that follows, where so much is shown,
to varied essences bestows that being,
to stars distinct and yet contained in it.

The other spheres, in ways diverse, direct
the diverse powers they possess, so that
these forces can bear fruit, attain their aims.

So do these organs of the universe
proceed, as you now see, from stage to stage,
receiving from above and acting downward.

Now do attend to how I pass by way
of reason to the truth you want that—then—
you may learn how to cross the ford alone.

The force and motion of the holy spheres
must be inspired by the blessed movers,
just as the smith imparts the hammer’s art;

and so, from the deep Mind that makes it wheel,
the sphere that many lights adorn receives
that stamp of which it then becomes the seal.

And as the soul within your dust is shared
by different organs, each most suited to
a different potency, so does that Mind

unfold and multiply its bounty through
the varied heavens, though that Intellect
itself revolves upon its unity.

With the dear body that it quickens and
with which, as life in you, it too is bound,
each different power forms a different compound.

Because of the glad nature of its source,
the power mingled with a sphere shines forth,
as gladness, through the living pupil, shines.

From this, and not from matter rare or dense,
derive the differences from light to light;
this is the forming principle, producing,

conforming with its worth, the dark, the bright.”

## 3

That sun which first had warmed my breast with love
had now revealed to me, confuting, proving,
the gentle face of truth, its loveliness;

and I, in order to declare myself
corrected and convinced, lifted my head
as high as my confessional required.

But a new vision showed itself to me;
the grip in which it held me was so fast
that I did not remember to confess.

Just as, returning through transparent, clean
glass, or through waters calm and crystalline
(so shallow that they scarcely can reflect),

the mirrored image of our faces meets
our pupils with no greater force than that
a pearl has when displayed on a white forehead—

so faint, the many faces I saw keen
to speak; thus, my mistake was contrary
to that which led the man to love the fountain.

As soon as I had noticed them, thinking
that what I saw were merely mirrorings,
I turned around to see who they might be;

and I saw nothing; and I let my sight
turn back to meet the light of my dear guide,
who, as she smiled, glowed in her holy eyes.

“There is no need to wonder if I smile,”
she said, “because you reason like a child;
your steps do not yet rest upon the truth;

your mind misguides you into emptiness:
what you are seeing are true substances,
placed here because their vows were not fulfilled.

Thus, speak and listen; trust what they will say:
the truthful light in which they find their peace
will not allow their steps to turn astray.”

Then I turned to the shade that seemed most anxious
to speak, and I began as would a man
bewildered by desire too intense:

“O spirit born to goodness, you who feel,
beneath the rays of the eternal life,
that sweetness which cannot be known unless

it is experienced, it would be gracious
of you to let me know your name and fate.”
At this, unhesitant, with smiling eyes:

“Our charity will never lock its gates
against just will; our love is like the Love
that would have all Its court be like Itself.

Within the world I was a nun, a virgin;
and if your mind attends and recollects,
my greater beauty here will not conceal me,

and you will recognize me as Piccarda,
who, placed here with the other blessed ones,
am blessed within the slowest of the spheres.

Our sentiments, which only serve the flame
that is the pleasure of the Holy Ghost,
delight in their conforming to His order.

And we are to be found within a sphere
this low, because we have neglected vows,
so that in some respect we were deficient.”

And I to her: “Within your wonderful
semblance there is something divine that glows,
transforming the appearance you once showed:

therefore, my recognizing you was slow;
but what you now have told me is of help;
I can identify you much more clearly.

But tell me: though you’re happy here, do you
desire a higher place in order to
see more and to be still more close to Him?”

Together with her fellow shades she smiled
at first; then she replied to me with such
gladness, like one who burns with love’s first flame:

“Brother, the power of love appeases our
will so—we only long for what we have;
we do not thirst for greater blessedness.

Should we desire a higher sphere than ours,
then our desires would be discordant with
the will of Him who has assigned us here,

but you’ll see no such discord in these spheres;
to live in love is—here—necessity,
if you think on love’s nature carefully.

The essence of this blessed life consists
in keeping to the boundaries of God’s will,
through which our wills become one single will;

so that, as we are ranged from step to step
throughout this kingdom, all this kingdom wills
that which will please the King whose will is rule.

And in His will there is our peace: that sea
to which all beings move—the beings He
creates or nature makes—such is His will.”

Then it was clear to me how every place
in Heaven is in Paradise, though grace
does not rain equally from the High Good.

But just as, when our hunger has been sated
with one food, we still long to taste the other—
while thankful for the first, we crave the latter—

so was I in my words and in my gestures,
asking to learn from her what was the web
of which her shuttle had not reached the end.

“A perfect life,” she said, “and her high merit
enheaven, up above, a woman whose
rule governs those who, in your world, would wear

nuns’ dress and veil, so that, until their death,
they wake and sleep with that Spouse who accepts
all vows that love conforms unto His pleasure.

Still young, I fled the world to follow her;
and, in her order’s habit, I enclosed
myself and promised my life to her rule.

Then men more used to malice than to good
took me—violently—from my sweet cloister:
God knows what, after that, my life became.

This other radiance that shows itself
to you at my right hand, a brightness kindled
by all the light that fills our heaven—she

has understood what I have said: she was
a sister, and from her head, too, by force,
the shadow of the sacred veil was taken.

But though she had been turned back to the world
against her will, against all honest practice,
the veil upon her heart was never loosed.

This is the splendor of the great Costanza,
who from the Swabians’ second gust engendered
the one who was their third and final power.”

This said, she then began to sing “Ave
Maria” and, while singing, vanished as
a weighty thing will vanish in deep water.

My sight, which followed her as long as it
was able to, once she was out of view,
returned to where its greater longing lay,

and it was wholly bent on Beatrice;
but she then struck my eyes with so much brightness
that I, at first, could not withstand her force;

and that made me delay my questioning.

## 4

Before a man bit into one of two
foods equally removed and tempting, he
would die of hunger if his choice were free;

so would a lamb stand motionless between
the cravings of two savage wolves, in fear
of both; so would a dog between two deer;

thus, I need neither blame nor praise myself
when both my doubts compelled me equally:
what kept me silent was necessity.

I did not speak, but in my face were seen
longing and questioning, more ardent than
if spoken words had made them evident.

Then Beatrice did just as Daniel did,
when he appeased Nebuchadnezzar's anger,
the rage that made the king unjustly fierce.

She said: “I see how both desires draw you,
so that your anxiousness to know is self—
entangled and cannot express itself.

You reason: 'If my will to good persists,
why should the violence of others cause
the measure of my merit to be less?'

And you are also led to doubt because
the doctrine Plato taught would find support
by souls' appearing to return to the stars.

These are the questions that, within your will,
press equally for answers; therefore, I
shall treat the most insidious question first.

Neither the Seraph closest unto God,
nor Moses, Samuel, nor either John—
whichever one you will — nor Mary has,

I say, their place in any other heaven
than that which houses those souls you just saw,
nor will their blessedness last any longer.

But all those souls grace the Empyrean;
and each of them has gentle life — though some
sense the Eternal Spirit more, some less.

They showed themselves to you here not because
this is their sphere, but as a sign for you
that in the Empyrean their place is lowest.

Such signs are suited to your mind, since from
the senses only can it apprehend
what then becomes fit for the intellect.

And this is why the Bible condescends
to human powers, assigning feet and hands
to God, but meaning something else instead.

And Gabriel and Michael and the angel
who healed the eyes of Tobit are portrayed
by Holy Church with human visages.

That which Timaeus said in reasoning
of souls does not describe what you have seen,
since it would seem that as he speaks he thinks.

He says the soul returns to that same star
from which — so he believes — it had been taken
when nature sent that soul as form to body;

but his opinion is, perhaps, to be
taken in other guise than his words speak,
intending something not to be derided.

If to these spheres he wanted to attribute
honor and blame for what they influence,
perhaps his arrow reaches something true.

This principle, ill — understood, misled
almost all of the world once, so that Jove
and Mercury and Mars gave names to stars.

The other doubt that agitates you is
less poisonous; for its insidiousness
is not such as to lead you far from me.

To mortal eyes our justice seems unjust;
that this is so, should serve as evidence
for faith — not heresy's depravity.

But that your intellect may penetrate
more carefully into your other query,
I shall — as you desire — explain it clearly.

If violence means that the one who suffers
has not abetted force in any way,
then there is no excuse these souls can claim:

for will, if it resists, is never spent,
but acts as nature acts when fire ascends,
though force — a thousand times — tries to compel.

So that, when will has yielded much or little,
it has abetted force — as these souls did:
they could have fled back to their holy shelter.

Had their will been as whole as that which held
Lawrence fast to the grate and that which made
of Mucius one who judged his own hand, then

once freed, they would have willed to find the faith
from which they had been dragged; but it is all
too seldom that a will is so intact.

And through these words, if you have grasped their bent,
you can eliminate the argument
that would have troubled you again — and often.

But now another obstacle obstructs
your sight; you cannot overcome it by
yourself — it is too wearying to try.

I've set it in your mind as something certain
that souls in blessedness can never lie,
since they are always near the Primal Truth.

But from Piccarda you were also able
to hear how Constance kept her love of the veil:
and here Piccarda seems to contradict me.

Before this — brother — it has often happened
that, to flee menace, men unwillingly
did what should not be done; so did Alcmaeon,

to meet the wishes of his father, kill
his mother — not to fail in filial
piety, he acted ruthlessly.

At that point — I would have you see — the forcea
to which one yielded mingles with one's will;
and no excuse can pardon their joint act.

Absolute will does not concur in wrong;
but the contingent will, through fear that its
resistance might bring greater harm, consents.

Therefore, Piccarda means the absolute
will when she speaks, and I the relative;
so that the two of us have spoken truth. "

Such was the rippling of the holy stream
issuing from the fountain from which springs
all truth: it set to rest both of my longings.

Then I said: "O beloved of the First
Lover, o you — divine — whose speech so floods
and warms me that I feel more and more life,

however deep my gratefulness, it can
not match your grace with grace enough; but He
who sees and can — may He grant recompense.

I now see well: we cannot satisfy
our mind unless it is enlightened by
the truth beyond whose boundary no truth lies.

Mind, reaching that truth, rests within it as
a beast within its lair; mind can attain
that truth — if not, all our desires were vain.

Therefore, our doubting blossoms like a shoot
out from the root of truth; this natural
urge spurs us toward the peak, from height to height.

Lady, my knowing why we doubt, invites,
sustains, my reverent asking you about
another truth that is obscure to me.

I want to know if, in your eyes, one can
amend for unkept vows with other acts—
good works your balance will not find too scant. "

Then Beatrice looked at me with eyes so full
of sparks of love, eyes so divine that my
own force of sight was overcome, took flight,

and, eyes downcast, I almost lost my senses.

## 5
“If in the fire of love I seem to flame
beyond the measure visible on earth,
so that I overcome your vision’s force,

you need not wonder; I am so because
of my perfected vision—as I grasp
the good, so I approach the good in act.

Indeed I see that in your intellect
now shines the never—ending light; once seen,
that light, alone and always, kindles love;

and if a lesser thing allure your love,
it is a vestige of that light which—though
imperfectly—gleams through that lesser thing.

You wish to know if, through a righteous act,
one can repair a promise unfulfilled,
so that the soul and God are reconciled.”

So Beatrice began this canto, and
as one who does not interrupt her speech,
so did her holy reasoning proceed:

“The greatest gift the magnanimity
of God, as He created, gave, the gift
most suited to His goodness, gift that He

most prizes, was the freedom of the will;
those beings that have intellect—all these
and none but these—received and do receive

this gift: thus you may draw, as consequence,
the high worth of a vow, when what is pledged
with your consent encounters God’s consent;

for when a pact is drawn between a man
and God, then through free will, a man gives up
what I have called his treasure, his free will.

What, then, can be a fitting compensation?
To use again what you had offered, would
mean seeking to do good with ill—got gains.

By now you understand the major point;
but since the Holy Church gives dispensations—
which seems in contrast with the truth I stated—

you need to sit at table somewhat longer:
the food that you have taken was tough food—
it still needs help, if you are to digest it.

Open your mind to what I shall disclose,
and hold it fast within you; he who hears,
but does not hold what he has heard, learns nothing.

Two things are of the essence when one vows
a sacrifice: the matter of the pledge
and then the formal compact one accepts.

This last can never be annulled until
the compact is fulfilled: it is of this
that I have spoken to you so precisely.

Therefore, the Hebrews found it necessary
to bring their offerings, although—as you
must know—some of their offerings might be altered.

As for the matter of the vow—discussed
above—it may be such that if one shifts
to other matter, one commits no sin.

But let none shift the burden on his shoulder
through his own judgment, without waiting for
the turning of the white and yellow keys;

and let him see that any change is senseless,
unless the thing one sets aside can be
contained in one’s new weight, as four in six.

Thus, when the matter of a vow has so
much weight and worth that it tips every scale,
no other weight can serve as substitute.

Let mortals never take a vow in jest;
be faithful and yet circumspect, not rash
as Jephthah was, in offering his first gift;

he should have said, ‘I did amiss,’ and not
done worse by keeping faith. And you can find
that same stupidity in the Greeks’ chief—

when her fair face made Iphigenia grieve
and made the wise and made the foolish weep
for her when they heard tell of such a rite.

Christians, proceed with greater gravity:
do not be like a feather at each wind,
nor think that all immersions wash you clean.

You have both Testaments, the Old and New,
you have the shepherd of the Church to guide you;
you need no more than this for your salvation.

If evil greed would summon you elsewhere,
be men, and not like sheep gone mad, so that
the Jew who lives among you not deride you!

Do not act like the foolish, wanton lamb
that leaves its mother’s milk and, heedless, wants
to war against—and harm—its very self!”

These words of Beatrice I here transcribe;
and then she turned—her longing at the full—
to where the world is more alive with light.

Her silence and the change in her appearance
imposed a silence on my avid mind,
which now was ready to address new questions;

and even as an arrow that has struck
the mark before the bow—cord comes to rest,
so did we race to reach the second realm.

When she had passed into that heaven’s light,
I saw my lady filled with so much gladness
that, at her joy, the planet grew more bright.

And if the planet changed and smiled, what then
did I—who by my very nature am
given to every sort of change—become?

As in a fish—pool that is calm and clear,
the fish draw close to anything that nears
from outside, if it seems to be their fare,

such were the far more than a thousand splendors
I saw approaching us, and each declared:
“Here now is one who will increase our loves.”

And even as each shade approached, one saw,
because of the bright radiance it sent forth,
the joyousness with which that shade was filled.

Consider, reader, what your misery
and need to know still more would be if, at
this point, what I began did not go on;

and you will—unassisted—feel how I
longed so to hear those shades narrate their state
as soon as they appeared before my eyes.

“O you born unto gladness, whom God’s grace
allows to see the thrones of the eternal
triumph before your war of life is ended,

the light that kindles us is that same light
which spreads through all of heaven; thus, if you
would know us, sate yourself as you may please.”

So did one of those pious spirits speak
to me. And Beatrice then urged: “Speak, speak
confidently; trust them as you trust gods.”

“I see—plainly—how you have nested in
your own light; see—you draw it from your eyes—
because it glistens even as you smile;

but I do not know who you are or why,
good soul, your rank is in a sphere concealed
from mortals by another planet’s rays.”

I said this as I stood turned toward the light
that first addressed me; and at this, it glowed
more radiantly than it had before.

Just as the sun, when heat has worn away
thick mists that moderate its rays, conceals
itself from sight through an excess of light,

so did that holy form, through excess gladness,
conceal himself from me within his rays;
and so concealed, concealed, he answered me

even as the next canto is to sing.

## 6

“After Constantine had turned the Eagle
counter to heaven’s course, the course it took
behind the ancient one who wed Lavinia,

one hundred and one hundred years and more,
the bird of God remained near Europe’s borders,
close to the peaks from which it first emerged;

beneath the shadow of the sacred wings,
it ruled the world, from hand to hand, until
that governing—changing—became my task.

Caesar I was and am Justinian,
who, through the will of Primal Love I feel,
removed the vain and needless from the laws.

Before I grew attentive to this labor,
I held that but one nature—and no more—
was Christ’s—and in that faith, I was content;

but then the blessed Agapetus, he
who was chief shepherd, with his words turned me
to that faith which has truth and purity.

I did believe him, and now clearly see
his faith, as you with contradictories
can see that one is true and one is false.

As soon as my steps shared the Church’s path,
God, of His grace, inspired my high task
as pleased Him. I was fully drawn to that.

Entrusting to my Belisarius
my arms, I found a sign for me to rest
from war: Heaven’s right hand so favored him.

My answer to the question you first asked
ends here, and yet the nature of this answer
leads me to add a sequel, so that you

may see with how much reason they attack
the sacred standard—those who seem to act
on its behalf and those opposing it.

See what great virtue made that Eagle worthy
of reverence, beginning from that hour
when Pallas died that it might gain a kingdom.

You know that for three hundred years and more,
it lived in Alba, until, at the end,
three still fought three, contending for that standard.

You know how, under seven kings, it conquered
its neighbors—in the era reaching from
wronged Sabine women to Lucrece’s grief—

and what it did when carried by courageous
Romans, who hurried to encounter Brennus,
Pyrrhus, and other principates and cities.

Through this, Torquatus, Quinctius (who is named
for his disheveled hair), the Decii,
and Fabii gained the fame I gladly honor.

That standard brought the pride of Arabs low
when they had followed Hannibal across
those Alpine rocks from which, Po, you descend.

Beneath that standard, Scipio, Pompey—
though young—triumphed; and to that hill beneath
which you were born, that standard seemed most harsh.

Then, near the time when Heaven wished to bring
all of the world to Heaven’s way—serene—
Caesar, as Rome had willed, took up that standard.

And what it did from Var to Rhine was seen
by the Isere, Saone, and Seine and all
the valley—floors whose rivers feed the Rhone.

And what it did, once it had left Ravenna
and leaped the Rubicon, was such a flight
as neither tongue nor writing can describe.

That standard led the legions on to Spain,
then toward Durazzo, and it struck Pharsalia
so hard that the warm Nile could feel that hurt.

It saw again its source, Antandros and
Simois, and the place where Hector lies;
then roused itself—the worse for Ptolemy.

From Egypt, lightning—like, it fell on Juba;
and then it hurried to the west of you,
where it could hear the trumpet of Pompey.

Because of what that standard did, with him
who bore it next, Brutus and Cassius howl
in Hell, and grief seized Modena, Perugia.

Because of it, sad Cleopatra weeps
still; as she fled that standard, from the asp
she drew a sudden and atrocious death.

And, with that very bearer, it then reached
the Red Sea shore: with him, that emblem brought
the world such peace that Janus’ shrine was shut.

But what the standard that has made me speak
had done before or then was yet to do
throughout the mortal realm where it holds rule,

comes to seem faint and insignificant
if one, with clear sight and pure sentiment,
sees what it did in the third Caesar’s hand;

for the true Justice that inspires me
granted to it—in that next Caesar’s hand-
the glory of avenging His own wrath.

Now marvel here at what I show to you:
with Titus—afterward—it hurried toward
avenging vengeance for the ancient sin.

And when the Lombard tooth bit Holy Church,
then Charlemagne, under the Eagle’s wings,
through victories he gained, brought help to her.

Now you can judge those I condemned above,
and judge how such men have offended, have
become the origin of all your evils.

For some oppose the universal emblem
with yellow lilies; others claim that emblem
for party: it is hard to see who is worse.

Let Ghibellines pursue their undertakings
beneath another sign, for those who sever
this sign and justice are bad followers.

And let not this new Charles strike at it with
his Guelphs—but let him fear the claws that stripped
a more courageous lion of its hide.

The sons have often wept for a father’s fault;
and let this son not think that God will change
the emblem of His force for Charles’s lilies.

This little planet is adorned with spirits
whose acts were righteous, but who acted for
the honor and the fame that they would gain:

and when desires tend toward earthly ends,
then, so deflected, rays of the true love
mount toward the life above with lesser force.

But part of our delight is measuring
rewards against our merit, and we see
that our rewards are neither less nor more.

Thus does the Living Justice make so sweet
the sentiments in us, that we are free
of any turning toward iniquity.

Differing voices join to sound sweet music;
so do the different orders in our life
render sweet harmony among these spheres.

And in this very pearl there also shines
the light of Romeo, of one whose acts,
though great and noble, met ungratefulness.

And yet those Provencals who schemed against him
had little chance to laugh, for he who finds
harm to himself in others’ righteous acts

takes the wrong path. Of Raymond Berenger’s
four daughters, each became a queen—and this,
poor and a stranger, Romeo accomplished.

Then Berenger was moved by vicious tongues
to ask this just man for accounting—one
who, given ten, gave Raymond five and seven.

And Romeo, the poor, the old, departed;
and were the world to know the heart he had
while begging, crust by crust, for his life—bread,

it—though it praise him now—would praise him more.”

## 7

“Hosanna, sanctus Deus sabaoth,
superillustrans claritate tua
felices ignes horum malacoth!”

Thus, even as he wheeled to his own music,
I saw that substance sing, that spirit—flame
above whom double lights were twinned; and he

and his companions moved within their dance,
and as if they were swiftest sparks, they sped
out of my sight because of sudden distance.

I was perplexed, and to myself, I said:
“Tell her! Tell her! Tell her, the lady who
can slake my thirst with her sweet drops”; and yet

the reverence that possesses all of me,
even on hearing only Be and ice,
had bowed my head—I seemed a man asleep.

But Beatrice soon ended that; for she
began to smile at me so brightly that,
even in fire, a man would still feel glad.

“According to my never—erring judgment,
the question that perplexes you is how
just vengeance can deserve just punishment;

but I shall quickly free your mind from doubt;
and listen carefully; the words I speak
will bring the gift of a great truth in reach.

Since he could not endure the helpful curb
on his willpower, the man who was not born,
damning himself, damned all his progeny.

For this, mankind lay sick, in the abyss
of a great error, for long centuries,
until the Word of God willed to descend

to where the nature that was sundered from
its Maker was united to His person
by the sole act of His eternal Love.

Now set your sight on what derives from that.
This nature, thus united to its Maker,
was good and pure, even as when created;

but in itself, this nature had been banished
from paradise, because it turned aside
from its own path, from truth, from its own life.

Thus, if the penalty the Cross inflicted
is measured by the nature He assumed,
no one has ever been so justly stung;

yet none was ever done so great a wrong,
if we regard the Person made to suffer,
He who had gathered in Himself that nature.

Thus, from one action, issued differing things:
God and the Jews were pleased by one same death;
earth trembled for that death and Heaven opened.

You need no longer find it difficult
to understand when it is said that just
vengeance was then avenged by a just court.

But I now see your understanding tangled
by thought on thought into a knot, from which,
with much desire, your mind awaits release.

You say: ‘What I have heard is clear to me;
but this is hidden from me—why God willed
precisely this pathway for our redemption.’

Brother, this ordinance is buried from
the eyes of everyone whose intellect
has not matured within the flame of love.

Nevertheless, since there is much attempting
to find this point, but little understanding,
I shall tell why that way was the most fitting.

The Godly Goodness that has banished every
envy from Its own Self, burns in Itself;
and sparkling so, It shows eternal beauties.

All that derives directly from this Goodness
is everlasting, since the seal of Goodness
impresses an imprint that never alters.

Whatever rains from It immediately
is fully free, for it is not constrained
by any influence of other things.

Even as it conforms to that Goodness,
so does it please It more; the Sacred Ardor
that gleams in all things is most bright within

those things most like Itself. The human being
has all these gifts, but if it loses one,
then its nobility has been undone.

Only man’s sin annuls man’s liberty,
makes him unlike the Highest Good, so that,
in him, the brightness of Its light is dimmed;

and man cannot regain his dignity
unless, where sin left emptiness, man fills
that void with just amends for evil pleasure.

For when your nature sinned so totally
within its seed, then, from these dignities,
just as from Paradise, that nature parted;

and they could never be regained—if you
consider carefully—by any way
that did not pass across one of these fords:

either through nothing other than His mercy,
God had to pardon man, or of himself
man had to proffer payment for his folly.

Now fix your eyes on the profundity
of the Eternal Counsel; heed as closely
as you are able to, my reasoning.

Man, in his limits, could not recompense;
for no obedience, no humility,
he offered later could have been so deep

that it could match the heights he meant to reach
through disobedience; man lacked the power
to offer satisfaction by himself.

Thus there was need for God, through His own ways,
to bring man back to life intact—I mean
by one way or by both. But since a deed

pleases its doer more, the more it shows
the goodness of the heart from which it springs,
the Godly Goodness that imprints the world

was happy to proceed through both Its ways
to raise you up again. Nor has there been,
nor will there be, between the final night

and the first day, a chain of actions so
lofty and so magnificent as He
enacted when He followed His two ways;

for God showed greater generosity
in giving His own self that man might be
able to rise, than if He simply pardoned;

for every other means fell short of justice,
except the way whereby the Son of God
humbled Himself when He became incarnate.

Now to give all your wishes full content,
I go back to explain one point, so that
you, too, may see it plainly, as I do.

You say: ‘I see that water, see that fire
and air and earth and all that they compose
come to corruption, and endure so briefly;

and yet these, too, were things created; if
what has been said above is true, then these
things never should be subject to corruption.’

Brother, the angels and the pure country
where you are now—these may be said to be
created, as they are, in all their being;

whereas the elements that you have mentioned,
as well as those things that are made from them,
receive their form from a created power.

The matter they contain had been created,
just as within the stars that wheel about them,
the power to give form had been created.

The rays and motion of the holy lights
draw forth the soul of every animal
and plant from matter able to take form;

but your life is breathed forth immediately
by the Chief Good, who so enamors it
of His own Self that it desires Him always.

So reasoning, you also can deduce
your resurrection; you need but remember
the way in which your human flesh was fashioned

when both of the first parents were created.”

## 8

The world, when still in peril, thought that, wheeling,
in the third epicycle, Cyprian
the fair sent down her rays of frenzied love,

so that, in ancient error, ancient peoples
not only honored her with sacrifices
and votive cries, but honored, too, Dione

and Cupid, one as mother, one as son
of Cyprian, and told how Cupid sat
in Dido’s lap; and gave the name of her

with whom I have begun this canto, to
the planet that is courted by the sun,
at times behind her and at times in front.

I did not notice my ascent to it,
yet I was sure I was in Venus when
I saw my lady grow more beautiful.

And just as, in a flame, a spark is seen,
and as, in plainsong, voice in voice is heard
one holds the note, the other comes and goes

I saw in that light other wheeling lamps,
some more and some less swift, yet in accord,
I think, with what their inner vision was.

Winds, seen or unseen, never have descended
so swiftly from cold clouds as not to seem
impeded, slow, to any who had seen

those godly lights approaching us, halting
the circling dance those spirits had begun
within the heaven of high Seraphim;

and a Hosanna sounded from within
their front ranks such that I have never been
without desire to hear it sound again.

Then one drew nearer us, and he began
alone: We all are ready at your pleasure,
so that you may receive delight from us.

One circle and one circling and one thirst
are ours as we revolve with the celestial
Princes whom, from the world, you once invoked:

‘You who, through understanding, move the third
heaven.’ Our love is so complete to bring
you joy, brief respite will not be less sweet.

After my eyes had turned with reverence
to see my lady, after her consent
had brought them reassurance and content,

they turned back to the light that promised me
so much; and, Tell me, who are you, I asked
in a voice stamped with loving sentiment.

And how much larger, brighter did I see
that spirit grow when, as I spoke, it felt
new gladness added to its gladnesses!

Thus changed, it then replied: The world held me
briefly below; but had my stay been longer,
much evil that will be, would not have been.

My happiness, surrounding me with rays,
keeps me concealed from you; it hides me like
a creature that is swathed in its own silk.

You loved me much and had good cause for that;
for had I stayed below, I should have showed
you more of my love than the leaves alone.

The left bank that the Rhone bathes after it
has mingled with the waters of the Sorgue,
awaited me in due time as its lord,

as did Ausonia’s horn, which south of where
the Tronto and the Verde reach the sea
Catona, Bari, and Gaeta border.

Upon my brow a crown already shone
the crown of that land where the Danube flows
when it has left behind its German shores.

And fair Trinacria, whom ashes (these
result from surging sulphur, not Typhoeus)
cover between Pachynus and Pelorus,

along the gulf that Eurus vexes most,
would still await its rulers born through me
from Charles and Rudolph, if ill sovereignty,

which always hurts the heart of subject peoples,
had not provoked Palermo to cry out:
‘Die! Die!’ And if my brother could foresee

what ill—rule brings, he would already flee
from Catalonia’s grasping poverty,
aware that it may cause him injury;

for truly there is need for either him
or others to prevent his loaded boat
from having to take on still greater loads.

His niggard nature is descended from
one who was generous; and he needs soldiers
who are not bent on filling up their coffers.

My lord, since I believe that you perceive
completely where all good begins and ends
the joy I see within myself on hearing

your words to me, my joy is felt more freely;
and I joy, too, in knowing you are blessed,
since you perceived this as you gazed at God.

You made me glad; so may you clear the doubt
that rose in me when you before described
how from a gentle seed, harsh fruit derives.

These were my words to him, and he replied:
If I can show one certain truth to you,
you will confront what now is at your back.

The Good that moves and makes content the realm
through which you now ascend, makes providence
act as a force in these great heavens’ bodies;

and in the Mind that, in itself, is perfect,
not only are the natures of His creatures
but their well—being, too, provided for;

and thus, whatever this bow shoots must fall
according to a providential end,
just like a shaft directed to its target.

Were this not so, the heavens you traverse
would bring about effects in such a way
that they would not be things of art but shards.

That cannot be unless the Minds that move
these planets are defective and, defective,
the First Mind, which had failed to make them perfect.

Would you have this truth still more clear to you?
I: No. I see it is impossible
for nature to fall short of what is needed.

He added: Tell me, would a man on earth
be worse if he were not a citizen?
Yes, I replied, and here I need no proof.

Can there be citizens if men below
are not diverse, with diverse duties? No,
if what your master writes is accurate.

Until this point that shade went on, deducing;
then he concluded: Thus, the roots from which
your tasks proceed must needs be different:

so, one is born a Solon, one a Xerxes,
and one a Melchizedek, and another,
he who flew through the air and lost his son.

Revolving nature, serving as a seal
for mortal wax, plies well its art, but it
does not distinguish one house from another.

Thus, even from the seed, Esau takes leave
of Jacob; and because he had a father
so base, they said Quirinus was Mars’ son.

Engendered natures would forever take
the path of those who had engendered them,
did not Divine provision intervene.

Now that which stood behind you, stands in front:
but so that you may know the joy you give me,
I now would cloak you with a corollary.

Where Nature comes upon discrepant fortune,
like any seed outside its proper region,
Nature will always yield results awry.

But if the world below would set its mind
on the foundation Nature lays as base
to follow, it would have its people worthy.

But you twist to religion one whose birth
made him more fit to gird a sword, and make
a king of one more fit for sermoning,

so that the track you take is off the road.

## 9

Fair Clemence, after I had been enlightened
by your dear Charles, he told me how his seed
would be defrauded, but he said: Be silent

and let the years revolve. All I can say
is this: lament for vengeance well-deserved
will follow on the wrongs you are to suffer.

And now the life-soul of that holy light
turned to the Sun that fills it even as
the Goodness that suffices for all things.

Ah, souls seduced and creatures without reverence,
who twist your hearts away from such a Good,
who let your brows be bent on emptiness!

And here another of those splendors moved
toward me; and by its brightening without,
it showed its wish to please me. Beatrice,

whose eyes were fixed on me, as they had been
before, gave me the precious certainty
that she consented to my need to speak.

Pray, blessed spirit, may you remedy
quickly my wish to know, I said. Give me
proof that you can reflect the thoughts I think.

At which that light, one still unknown to me,
out of the depth from which it sang before,
continued as if it rejoiced in kindness:

In that part of indecent Italy
that lies between Rialto and the springs
from which the Brenta and the Piave stream,

rises a hill of no great height from which
a firebrand descended, and it brought
much injury to all the land about.

Both he and I were born of one same root:
Cunizza was my name, and I shine here
because this planet’s radiance conquered me.

But in myself I pardon happily
the reason for my fate; I do not grieve
and vulgar minds may find this hard to see.

Of the resplendent, precious jewel that stands
most close to me within—our heaven, much
fame still remains and will not die away

before this hundredth year returns five times:
see then if man should not seek excellence
that his first life bequeath another life.

And this, the rabble that is now enclosed
between the Adige and Tagliamento
does not consider, nor does it repent

despite its scourgings; and since it would shun
its duty, at the marsh the Paduans
will stain the river-course that bathes Vicenza;

and where the Sile and Cagnano flow
in company, one lords it, arrogant;
the net to catch him is already set.

Feltre shall yet lament the treachery
of her indecent shepherd act so filthy
that for the like none ever entered prison.

The vat to hold the blood of the Ferrarese
would be too large indeed, and weary he
who weighs it ounce by ounce the vat that he,

generous priest, will offer up to show
fidelity to his Guelph party; and
such gifts will suit the customs of that land.

Above are mirrors Thrones is what you call them
and from them God in judgment shines on us;
and thus we think it right to say such things.

Here she was silent and appeared to me
to turn toward other things, reentering
the wheeling dance where she had been before.

The other joy, already known to me
as precious, then appeared before my eyes
like a pure ruby struck by the sun’s rays.

On high, joy is made manifest by brightness,
as, here on earth, by smiles; but down below,
the shade grows darker when the mind feels sorrow.

God can see all, I said, and, blessed spirit,
your vision is contained in Him, so that
no wish can ever hide itself from you.

Your voice has always made the heavens glad
as has the singing of the pious fires
that make themselves a cowl of their six wings:

why then do you not satisfy my longings?
I would not have to wait for your request
if I could enter you as you do me.

The widest valley into which the waters
spread from the sea that girds the world, his words
began, between discrepant shores, extends

eastward so far against the sun, that when
those waters end at the meridian,
that point when they began was the horizon.

I lived along the shoreline of that valley
between the Ebro and the Magra, whose
brief course divides the Genoese and Tuscans.

Beneath the same sunset, the same sunrise,
lie both Bougie and my own city, which
once warmed its harbor with its very blood.

Those men to whom my name was known, called me
Folco; and even as this sphere receives
my imprint, so was I impressed with its;

for even Belus’ daughter, wronging both
Sychaeus and Creusa, did not burn
more than I did, as long as I was young;

nor did the Rhodopean woman whom
Demophoon deceived, nor did Alcides
when he enclosed Iole in his heart.

Yet one does not repent here; here one smiles
not for the fault, which we do not recall,
but for the Power that fashioned and foresaw.

For here we contemplate the art adorned
by such great love, and we discern the good
through which the world above forms that below.

But so that all your longings born within
this sphere may be completely satisfied
when you bear them away, I must continue.

You wish to know what spirit is within
the light that here beside me sparkles so,
as would a ray of sun in limpid water.

Know then that Rahab lives serenely in
that light, and since her presence joins our order,
she seals that order in the highest rank.

This heaven, where the shadow cast by earth
comes to a point, had Rahab as the first
soul to be taken up when Christ triumphed.

And it was right to leave her in this heaven
as trophy of the lofty victory
that Christ won, palm on palm, upon the cross,

for she had favored the initial glory
of Joshua within the Holy Land
which seldom touches the Pope’s memory.

Your city, which was planted by that one
who was the first to turn against his Maker,
the one whose envy cost us many tears

produces and distributes the damned flower
that turns both sheep and lambs from the true course,
for of the shepherd it has made a wolf.

For this the Gospel and the great Church Fathers
are set aside and only the Decretals
are studied as their margins clearly show.

On these the pope and cardinals are intent.
Their thoughts are never bent on Nazareth,
where Gabriel’s open wings were reverent.

And yet the hill of Vatican as well
as other noble parts of Rome that were
the cemetery for Peter’s soldiery

will soon be freed from priests’ adultery.

## 10

Gazing upon His Son with that Love which
One and the Other breathe eternally,
the Power—first and inexpressible—

made everything that wheels through mind and space
so orderly that one who contemplates
that harmony cannot but taste of Him.

Then, reader, lift your eyes with me to see
the high wheels; gaze directly at that part
where the one motion strikes against the other;

and there begin to look with longing at
that Master’s art, which in Himself he loves
so much that his eye never parts from it.

See there the circle branching from that cross—point
obliquely: zodiac to bear the planets
that satisfy the world in need of them.

For if the planets’ path were not aslant,
much of the heavens’ virtue would be wasted
and almost every power on earth be dead;

and if the zodiac swerved more or less
far from the straight course, then earth’s harmony
would be defective in both hemispheres.

Now, reader, do not leave your bench, but stay
to think on that of which you have foretaste;
you will have much delight before you tire.

I have prepared your fare; now feed yourself,
because that matter of which I am made
the scribe calls all my care unto itself.

The greatest minister of nature—he
who imprints earth with heaven’s worth and, with
his light, provides the measurement for time—

since he was in conjunction with the part
I noted, now was wheeling through the spirals
where he appears more early every day.

And I was with him, but no more aware
of the ascent than one can be aware
of any sudden thought before it starts.

The one who guides me so from good to better
is Beatrice, and on our path her acts
have so much swiftness that they span no time.

How bright within themselves must be the lights
I saw on entering the Sun, for they
were known to me by splendor, not by color!

Though I should call on talent, craft, and practice,
my telling cannot help them be imagined;
but you can trust—and may you long to see it.

And if our fantasies fall short before
such heights, there is no need to wonder; for
no eye has seen light brighter than the Sun’s.

Such was the sphere of His fourth family,
whom the High Father always satisfies,
showing how He engenders and breathes forth.

And Beatrice began: “Give thanks, give thanks
to Him, the angels’ Sun, who, through His grace,
has lifted you to this embodied sun.”

No mortal heart was ever so disposed
to worship, or so quick to yield itself
to God with all its gratefulness, as I

was when I heard those words, and all my love
was so intent on Him that Beatrice
was then eclipsed within forgetfulness.

And she was not displeased, but smiled at this,
so that the splendor of her smiling eyes
divided my rapt mind between two objects.

And I saw many lights, alive, most bright;
we formed the center, they became a crown,
their voices even sweeter than their splendor:

just so, at times, we see Latona’s daughter
circled when saturated air holds fast
the thread that forms the girdle of her halo.

In Heaven’s court, from which I have returned,
one finds so many fair and precious gems
that are not to be taken from that kingdom:

one of those gems, the song those splendors sang.
He who does not take wings to reach that realm,
may wait for tidings of it from the mute.

After those ardent suns, while singing so,
had wheeled three times around us, even as
stars that are close to the fixed poles, they seemed

to me like women who, though not released
from dancing, pause in silence, listening
until new notes invite to new dancing.

And from within one light I heard begin:
“Because the ray of grace, from which true love
is kindled first and then, in loving, grows,

shines with such splendor, multiplied, in you,
that it has led you up the stair that none
descends who will not climb that stair again,

whoever would refuse to quench your thirst
with wine from his flask, would be no more free
than water that does not flow toward the sea.

You want to know what plants bloom in this garland
that, circling, contemplates with love the fair
lady who strengthens your ascent to heaven.

I was a lamb among the holy flock
that Dominic leads on the path where one
may fatten well if one does not stray off.

He who is nearest on my right was both
my brother and my teacher: from Cologne,
Albert, and I am Thomas of Aquino.

If you would know who all the others are,
then even as I speak let your eyes follow,
making their way around the holy wreath.

That next flame issues from the smile of Gratian,
who served one and the other court of law
so well that his work pleases Paradise.

That other, who adorns our choir next—
he was that Peter who, like the poor widow,
offered his treasure to the Holy Church.

The fifth light, and the fairest light among us,
breathes forth such love that all the world below
hungers for tidings of it; in that flame

there is the lofty mind where such profound
wisdom was placed that, if the truth be true,
no other ever rose with so much vision.

Next you can see the radiance of that candle
which, in the flesh, below, beheld most deeply
the angels’ nature and their ministry.

Within the other little light there smiles
that champion of the Christian centuries
whose narrative was used by Augustine.

Now, if your mind’s eye, following my praising,
was drawn from light to light, you must already
be thirsting for the eighth: within that light,

because he saw the Greatest Good, rejoices
the blessed soul who makes the world’s deceit
most plain to all who hear him carefully.

The flesh from which his soul was banished lies
below, within Cieldauro, and he came
from martyrdom and exile to this peace.

Beyond, you see, flaming, the ardent spirits
of Isidore and Bede and Richard—he
whose meditation made him more than man.

This light from whom your gaze returns to me
contains a spirit whose oppressive thoughts
made him see death as coming much too slowly:

it is the everlasting light of Siger,
who when he lectured in the Street of Straw
demonstrated truths that earned him envy.”

Then, like a clock that calls us at the hour
in which the Bride of God, on waking, sings
matins to her Bridegroom, encouraging

His love (when each clock—part both drives and draws),
chiming the sounds with notes so sweet that those
with spirit well—disposed feel their love grow;

so did I see the wheel that moved in glory
go round and render voice to voice with such
sweetness and such accord that they can not

be known except where joy is everlasting

## 11

O senseless cares of mortals, how deceiving
are syllogistic reasonings that bring
your wings to flight so low, to earthly things!

One studied law and one the Aphorisms
of the physicians; one was set on priesthood
and one, through force or fraud, on rulership;

one meant to plunder, one to politick;
one labored, tangled in delights of flesh,
and one was fully bent on indolence;

while I, delivered from our servitude
to all these things, was in the height of heaven
with Beatrice, so gloriously welcomed.

After each of those spirits had returned
to that place in the ring where it had been,
it halted, like a candle in its stand.

And from within the splendor that had spoken
to me before, I heard him, as he smiled—
become more radiant, more pure—begin:

“Even as I grow bright within Its rays,
so, as I gaze at the Eternal Light,
I can perceive your thoughts and see their cause.

You are in doubt; you want an explanation
in language that is open and expanded,
so clear that it contents your understanding

of two points: where I said, ‘They fatten well,’
and where I said, ‘No other ever rose’—
and here one has to make a clear distinction.

The Providence that rules the world with wisdom
so fathomless that creatures’ intellects
are vanquished and can never probe its depth,

so that the Bride of Him who, with loud cries,
had wed her with His blessed blood, might meet
her Love with more fidelity and more

assurance in herself, on her behalf
commanded that there be two princes, one
on this side, one on that side, as her guides.

One prince was all seraphic in his ardor;
the other, for his wisdom, had possessed
the splendor of cherubic light on earth.

I shall devote my tale to one, because
in praising either prince one praises both:
the labors of the two were toward one goal.

Between Topino’s stream and that which flows
down from the hill the blessed Ubaldo chose,
from a high peak there hangs a fertile slope;

from there Perugia feels both heat and cold
at Porta Sole, while behind it sorrow
Nocera and Gualdo under their hard yoke.

From this hillside, where it abates its rise,
a sun was born into the world, much like
this sun when it is climbing from the Ganges.

Therefore let him who names this site not say
Ascesi, which would be to say too little,
but Orient, if he would name it rightly.

That sun was not yet very distant from
his rising, when he caused the earth to take
some comfort from his mighty influence;

for even as a youth, he ran to war
against his father, on behalf of her—
the lady unto whom, just as to death,

none willingly unlocks the door; before
his spiritual court et coram patre,
he wed her; day by day he loved her more.

She was bereft of her first husband; scorned,
obscure, for some eleven hundred years,
until that sun came, she had had no suitor.

Nor did it help her when men heard that he
who made earth tremble found her unafraid—
serene, with Amyclas—when he addressed her;

nor did her constancy and courage help
when she, even when Mary stayed below,
suffered with Christ upon the cross. But so

that I not tell my tale too darkly, you
may now take Francis and take Poverty
to be the lovers meant in my recounting.

Their harmony and their glad looks, their love
and wonder and their gentle contemplation,
served others as a source of holy thoughts;

so much so, that the venerable Bernard
went barefoot first; he hurried toward such peace;
and though he ran, he thought his pace too slow.

O wealth unknown! O good that is so fruitful!
Egidius goes barefoot, and Sylvester,
behind the groom—the bride delights them so.

Then Francis—father, master—goes his way
with both his lady and his family,
the lowly cord already round their waists.

Nor did he lower his eyes in shame because
he was the son of Pietro Bernardone,
nor for the scorn and wonder he aroused;

but like a sovereign, he disclosed in full—
to Innocent—the sternness of his rule;
from him he had the first seal of his order.

And after many of the poor had followed
Francis, whose wondrous life were better sung
by glory’s choir in the Empyrean,

the sacred purpose of this chief of shepherds
was then encircled with a second crown
by the Eternal Spirit through Honorius.

And after, in his thirst for martyrdom,
within the presence of the haughty Sultan,
he preached of Christ and those who followed Him.

But, finding hearers who were too unripe
to be converted, he—not wasting time—
returned to harvest the Italian fields;

there, on the naked crag between the Arno
and Tiber, he received the final seal
from Christ; and this, his limbs bore for two years.

When He who destined Francis to such goodness
was pleased to draw him up to the reward
that he had won through his humility,

then to his brothers, as to rightful heirs,
Francis commended his most precious lady,
and he bade them to love her faithfully;

and when, returning to its kingdom, his
bright soul wanted to set forth from her bosom,
it, for its body, asked no other bier.

Consider now that man who was a colleague
worthy of Francis; with him, in high seas,
he kept the bark of Peter on true course.

Such was our patriarch; thus you can see
that those who follow him as he commands,
as cargo carry worthy merchandise.

But now his flock is grown so greedy for
new nourishment that it must wander far,
in search of strange and distant grazing lands;

and as his sheep, remote and vagabond,
stray farther from his side, at their return
into the fold, their lack of milk is greater.

Though there are some indeed who, fearing harm,
stay near the shepherd, they are few in number—
to cowl them would require little cloth.

Now if my words are not too dim and distant,
if you have listened carefully to them,
if you can call to mind what has been said,

then part of what you wish to know is answered,
for you will see the splinters on the plant
and see what my correction meant: ‘Where one

may fatten well, if one does not stray off.'”

## 12

No sooner had the blessed flame begun
to speak its final word than the millstone
of holy lights began to turn, but it

was not yet done with one full revolution
before another ring surrounded it,
and motion matched with motion, song with song—

a song that, sung by those sweet instruments,
surpasses so our Muses and our Sirens
as firstlight does the light that is reflected.

Just as, concentric, like in color, two
rainbows will curve their way through a thin cloud
when Juno has commanded her handmaid,

the outer rainbow echoing the inner,
much like the voice of one—the wandering nymph—
whom love consumed as sun consumes the mist

(and those two bows let people here foretell,
by reason of the pact God made with Noah,
that flood will never strike the world again):

so the two garlands of those everlasting
roses circled around us, and so did
the outer circle mime the inner ring.

When dance and jubilation, festival
of song and flame that answered flame, of light
with light, of gladness and benevolence,

in one same instant, with one will, fell still
(just as the eyes, when moved by their desire,
can only close and open in accord),

then from the heart of one of the new lights
there came a voice, and as I turned toward it,
I seemed a needle turning to the polestar;

and it began: “The love that makes me fair
draws me to speak about the other leader
because of whom my own was so praised here.

Where one is, it is right to introduce
the other: side by side, they fought, so may
they share in glory and together gleam.

Christ’s army, whose rearming cost so dearly,
was slow, uncertain of itself, and scanty
behind its ensign, when the Emperor

who rules forever helped his ranks in danger—
only out of His grace and not their merits.
And, as was said, He then sustained His bride,

providing her with two who could revive
a straggling people: champions who would
by doing and by preaching bring new life.

In that part of the West where gentle zephyr
rises to open those new leaves in which
Europe appears reclothed, not far from where,

behind the waves that beat upon the coast,
the sun, grown weary from its lengthy course,
at times conceals itself from all men’s eyes—

there, Calaroga, blessed by fortune, sits
under the aegis of the mighty shield
on which the lion loses and prevails.

Within its walls was born the loving vassal
of Christian faith, the holy athlete, one
kind to his own and harsh to enemies;

no sooner was his mind created than
it was so full of living force that it,
still in his mother’s womb, made her prophetic.

Then, at the sacred font, where Faith and he
brought mutual salvation as their dowry,
the rites of their espousal were complete.

The lady who had given the assent
for him saw, in a dream, astonishing
fruit that would spring from him and from his heirs.

And that his name might echo what he was,
a spirit moved from here to have him called
by the possessive of the One by whom

he was possessed completely. Dominic
became his name; I speak of him as one
whom Christ chose as the worker in His garden.

He seemed the fitting messenger and servant
of Christ: the very first love that he showed
was for the first injunction Christ had given.

His nurse would often find him on the ground,
alert and silent, in a way that said:
‘It is for this that I have come.’ Truly,

his father was Felice and his mother
Giovanna if her name, interpreted,
is in accord with what has been asserted.

Not for the world, for which men now travail
along Taddeo’s way or Ostian’s,
but through his love of the true manna, he

became, in a brief time, so great a teacher
that he began to oversee the vineyard
that withers when neglected by its keeper.

And from the seat that once was kinder to
the righteous poor (and now has gone astray,
not in itself, but in its occupant),

he did not ask to offer two or three
for six, nor for a vacant benefice,
nor decimas, quae sunt pauperum Dei—

but pleaded for the right to fight against
the erring world, to serve the seed from which
there grew the four—and—twenty plants that ring you.

Then he, with both his learning and his zeal,
and with his apostolic office, like
a torrent hurtled from a mountain source,

coursed, and his impetus, with greatest force,
struck where the thickets of the heretics
offered the most resistance. And from him

there sprang the streams with which the catholic
garden has found abundant watering,
so that its saplings have more life, more green.

If such was one wheel of the chariot
in which the Holy Church, in her defense,
taking the field, defeated enemies

within, then you must see the excellence
of him—the other wheel—whom Thomas praised
so graciously before I made my entry.

And yet the track traced by the outer rim
of that wheel is abandoned now—as in
a cask of wine when crust gives way to mold.

His family, which once advanced with steps
that followed his footprints, has now turned back:
its forward foot now seeks the foot that lags.

And soon we are to see, at harvest time,
the poor grain gathered, when the tares will be
denied a place within the bin—and weep.

I do admit that, if one were to search
our volume leaf by leaf, he might still read
one page with, ‘I am as I always was’;

but those of Acquasparta or Casale
who read our Rule are either given to
escaping it or making it too strict.

I am the living light of Bonaventure
of Bagnorea; in high offices
I always put the left—hand interests last.

Illuminato and Augustine are here;
they were among the first unshod poor brothers
to wear the cord, becoming friends of God.

Hugh of St. Victor, too, is here with them;
Peter of Spain, who, with his twelve books, glows
on earth below; and Peter Book—Devourer,

Nathan the prophet, Anselm, and Chrysostom
the Metropolitan, and that Donatus
who deigned to deal with that art which comes first.

Rabanus, too, is here; and at my side
shines the Calabrian Abbot Joachim,
who had the gift of the prophetic spirit.

To this—my praise of such a paladin—
the glowing courtesy and the discerning
language of Thomas urged me on and stirred,

with me, the souls that form this company.”


## 13

Let him imagine, who would rightly seize
what I saw now—and let him while I speak
retain that image like a steadfast rock—

in heaven’s different parts, those fifteen stars
that quicken heaven with such radiance
as to undo the air’s opacities;

let him imagine, too, that Wain which stays
within our heaven’s bosom night and day,
so that its turning never leaves our sight;

let him imagine those two stars that form
the mouth of that Horn which begins atop
the axle round which the first wheel revolves;

then see these join to form two signs in heaven—
just like the constellation that was shaped
by Minos’ daughter when she felt death’s chill—

two signs with corresponding radii,
revolving so that one sign moves in one
direction, and the other in a second;

and he will have a shadow—as it were—
of the true constellation, the double dance
that circled round the point where I was standing:

a shadow—since its truth exceeds our senses,
just as the swiftest of all heavens is
more swift than the Chiana’s sluggishness.

They sang no Bacchus there, they sang no Paean,
but sang three Persons in the divine nature,
and in one Person the divine and human.

The singing and the dance fulfilled their measure;
and then those holy lights gave heed to us,
rejoicing as they turned from task to task.

The silence of the blessed fellowship
was broken by the very light from which
I heard the wondrous life of God’s poor man;

that light said: “Since one stalk is threshed, and since
its grain is in the granary already,
sweet love leads me to thresh the other stalk.

You think that any light which human nature
can rightfully possess was all infused
by that Force which had shaped both of these two:

the one out of whose chest was drawn the rib
from which was formed the lovely cheek whose palate
was then to prove so costly to the world;

and One whose chest was transfixed by the lance,
who satisfied all past and future sins,
outweighing them upon the scales of justice.

Therefore you wondered at my words when I—
before—said that no other ever vied
with that great soul enclosed in the fifth light.

Now let your eyes hold fast to my reply,
and you will see: truth centers both my speech
and your belief, just like a circle’s center.

Both that which never dies and that which dies
are only the reflected light of that
Idea which our Sire, with Love, begets;

because the living Light that pours out so
from Its bright Source that It does not disjoin
from It or from the Love intrined with them,

through Its own goodness gathers up Its rays
within nine essences, as in a mirror,
Itself eternally remaining One.

From there, from act to act, light then descends
down to the last potentialities,
where it is such that it engenders nothing

but brief contingent things, by which I mean
the generated things the moving heavens
bring into being, with or without seed.

The wax of such things and what shapes that wax
are not immutable; and thus, beneath
Idea’s stamp, light shines through more or less.

Thus it can be that, in the selfsame species,
some trees bear better fruit and some bear worse,
and men are born with different temperaments.

For were the wax appropriately readied,
and were the heaven’s power at its height,
the brightness of the seal would show completely;

but Nature always works defectively—
she passes on that light much like an artist
who knows his craft but has a hand that trembles.

Yet where the ardent Love prepares and stamps
the lucid Vision of the primal Power,
a being then acquires complete perfection.

In that way, earth was once made worthy of
the full perfection of a living being;
thus was the Virgin made to be with child.

So that I do approve of the opinion
you hold: that human nature never was
nor shall be what it was in those two persons.

Now if I said no more beyond this point,
your words might well begin, ‘How is it, then,
with your assertion of his matchless vision?’

But so that the obscure can be made plain,
consider who he was, what was the cause
of his request when he was told, ‘Do ask.’

My words did not prevent your seeing clearly
that it was as a king that he had asked
for wisdom that would serve his royal task—

and not to know the number of the angels
on high or, if combined with a contingent,
necesse ever can produce necesse,

or si est dare primum motum esse,
or if, within a semicircle, one
can draw a triangle with no right angle.

Thus, if you note both what I said and say,
by ‘matchless vision’ it is kingly prudence
my arrow of intention means to strike;

and if you turn clear eyes to that word ‘rose,’
you’ll see that it referred to kings alone—
kings, who are many, and the good are rare.

Take what I said with this distinction then;
in that way it accords with what you thought
of the first father and of our Beloved.

And let this weigh as lead to slow your steps,
to make you move as would a weary man
to yes or no when you do not see clearly:

whether he would affirm or would deny,
he who decides without distinguishing
must be among the most obtuse of men;

opinion—hasty—often can incline
to the wrong side, and then affection for
one’s own opinion binds, confines the mind.

Far worse than uselessly he leaves the shore
(more full of error than he was before)
who fishes for the truth but lacks the art.

Of this, Parmenides, Melissus, Bryson,
are clear proofs to the world, and many others
who went their way but knew not where it went;

so did Sabellius and Arius
and other fools—like concave blades that mirror—
who rendered crooked the straight face of Scriptures.

So, too, let men not be too confident
in judging—witness those who, in the field,
would count the ears before the corn is ripe;

for I have seen, all winter through, the brier
display itself as stiff and obstinate,
and later, on its summit, bear the rose;

and once I saw a ship sail straight and swift
through all its voyaging across the sea,
then perish at the end, at harbor entry.

Let not Dame Bertha or Master Martin think
that they have shared God’s Counsel when they see
one rob and see another who donates:

the last may fall, the other may be saved.”


## 14

From rim to center, center out to rim,
so does the water move in a round vessel,
as it is struck without, or struck within.

What I am saying fell most suddenly
into my mind, as soon as Thomas’s
glorious living flame fell silent, since

between his speech and that of Beatrice,
a similarity was born. And she,
when he was done, was pleased to start with this:

“He does not tell you of it—not with speech
nor in his thoughts as yet—but this man needs
to reach the root of still another truth.

Do tell him if that light with which your soul
blossoms will stay with you eternally
even as it is now; and if it stays,

do tell him how, when you are once again
made visible, it will be possible
for you to see such light and not be harmed.”

As dancers in a ring, when drawn and driven
by greater gladness, lift at times their voices
and dance their dance with more exuberance,

so, when they heard that prompt, devout request,
the blessed circles showed new joyousness
in wheeling dance and in amazing song.

Whoever weeps because on earth we die
that we may live on high, has never seen
eternal showers that bring refreshment there.

That One and Two and Three who ever lives
and ever reigns in Three and Two and One,
not circumscribed and circumscribing all,

was sung three times by each and all those souls
with such a melody that it would be
appropriate reward for every merit.

And I could hear within the smaller circle’s
divinest light a modest voice (perhaps
much like the angel’s voice in speech to Mary)

reply: “As long as the festivity
of Paradise shall be, so long shall our
love radiate around us such a garment.

Its brightness takes its measure from our ardor,
our ardor from our vision, which is measured
by what grace each receives beyond his merit.

When, glorified and sanctified, the flesh
is once again our dress, our persons shall,
in being all complete, please all the more;

therefore, whatever light gratuitous
the Highest Good gives us will be enhanced—
the light that will allow us to see Him;

that light will cause our vision to increase,
the ardor vision kindles to increase,
the brightness born of ardor to increase.

Yet even as a coal engenders flame,
but with intenser glow outshines it, so
that in that flame the coal persists, it shows,

so will the brightness that envelops us
be then surpassed in visibility
by reborn flesh, which earth now covers up.

Nor will we tire when faced with such bright light,
for then the body’s organs will have force
enough for all in which we can delight.”

One and the other choir seemed to me
so quick and keen to say “Amen” that they
showed clearly how they longed for their dead bodies—

not only for themselves, perhaps, but for
their mothers, fathers, and for others dear
to them before they were eternal flames.

And—look!—beyond the light already there,
an added luster rose around those rings,
even as a horizon brightening.

And even as, at the approach of evening,
new lights begin to show along the sky,
so that the sight seems and does not seem real,

it seemed to me that I began to see
new spirits there, forming a ring beyond
the choirs with their two circumferences.

O the true sparkling of the Holy Ghost—
how rapid and how radiant before
my eyes that, overcome, could not sustain it!

But, smiling, Beatrice then showed to me
such loveliness—it must be left among
the visions that take flight from memory.

From this my eyes regained the strength to look
above again; I saw myself translated
to higher blessedness, alone with my

lady; and I was sure that I had risen
because the smiling star was red as fire—
beyond the customary red of Mars.

With all my heart and in that language which
is one for all, for this new grace I gave
to God my holocaust, appropriate.

Though in my breast that burning sacrifice
was not completed yet, I was aware
that it had been accepted and auspicious;

for splendors, in two rays, appeared to me,
so radiant and fiery that I said:
“O Helios, you who adorn them thus!”

As, graced with lesser and with larger lights
between the poles of the world, the Galaxy
gleams so that even sages are perplexed;

so, constellated in the depth of Mars,
those rays described the venerable sign
a circle’s quadrants form where they are joined.

And here my memory defeats my wit:
Christ’s flaming from that cross was such that I
can find no fit similitude for it.

But he who takes his cross and follows Christ
will pardon me again for my omission—
my seeing Christ flash forth undid my force.

Lights moved along that cross from horn to horn
and from the summit to the base, and as
they met and passed, they sparkled, radiant:

so, straight and slant and quick and slow, one sees
on earth the particles of bodies, long
and short, in shifting shapes, that move along

the ray of light that sometimes streaks across
the shade that men devise with skill and art
to serve as their defense against the sun.

And just as harp and viol, whose many chords
are tempered, taut, produce sweet harmony
although each single note is not distinct,

so, from the lights that then appeared to me,
out from that cross there spread a melody
that held me rapt, although I could not tell

what hymn it was. I knew it sang high praise,
since I heard “Rise” and “Conquer,” but I was
as one who hears but cannot seize the sense.

Yet I was so enchanted by the sound
that until then no thing had ever bound
me with such gentle bonds. My words may seem

presumptuous, as though I dared to deem
a lesser thing the lovely eyes that bring
to my desire, as it gazes, peace.

But he who notes that, in ascent, her eyes—
all beauty’s living seals—gain force, and notes
that I had not yet turned to them in Mars,

can then excuse me—just as I accuse
myself, thus to excuse myself—and see
that I speak truly: here her holy beauty

is not denied—ascent makes it more perfect.

## 15

Generous will — in which is manifest
always the love that breathes toward righteousness,
as in contorted will is greediness—

imposing silence on that gentle lyre,
brought quiet to the consecrated chords
that Heaven's right hand slackens and draws taut.

Can souls who prompted me to pray to them,
by falling silent all in unison,
be deaf to men's just prayers? Then he may grieve

indeed and endlessly — the man who leaves
behind such love and turns instead to seek
things that do not endure eternally.

As, through the pure and tranquil skies of night,
at times a sudden fire shoots, and moves
eyes that were motionless — a fire that seems

a star that shifts its place, except that in
that portion of the heavens where it flared,
nothing is lost, and its own course is short—

so, from the horn that stretches on the right,
down to the foot of that cross, a star ran
out of the constellation glowing there;

nor did that gem desert the cross's track,
but coursed along the radii, and seemed
just like a flame that alabaster screens.

With such affection did Anchises' shade
reach out (if we may trust our greatest muse)
when in Elysium he saw his son.

"O blood of mine — o the celestial grace
bestowed beyond all measure — unto whom
as unto you was Heaven's gate twice opened?"

That light said this; at which, I stared at him.
Then, looking back to see my lady, I,
on this side and on that, was stupefied;

for in the smile that glowed within her eyes,
I thought that I — with mine — had touched the height
of both my blessedness and paradise.

Then — and he was a joy to hear and see—
that spirit added to his first words things
that were too deep to meet my understanding.

Not that he chose to hide his sense from me;
necessity compelled him; he conceived
beyond the mark a mortal mind can reach.

And when his bow of burning sympathy
was slack enough to let his speech descend
to meet the limit of our intellect,

these were the first words where I caught the sense:
"Blessed be you, both Three and One, who show
such favor to my seed." And he continued:

"The long and happy hungering I drew
from reading that great volume where both black
and white are never changed, you — son — have now

appeased within this light in which I speak
to you; for this, I owe my gratitude
to her who gave you wings for your high flight.

You think your thoughts flow into me from Him
who is the First — as from the number one,
the five and six derive, if one is known—

and so you do not ask me who I am
and why I seem more joyous to you than
all other spirits in this festive throng.

Your thought is true, for both the small and great
of this life gaze into that mirror where,
before you think, your thoughts have been displayed.

But that the sacred love in which I keep
my vigil with unending watchfulness,
the love that makes me thirst with sweet desire,

be better satisfied, let your voice — bold,
assured, and glad — proclaim your will and longing,
to which my answer is decreed already. "

I turned to Beatrice, but she heard me
before I spoke; her smile to me was signal
that made the wings of my desire grow.

Then I began: "As soon as you beheld
the First Equality, both intellect
and love weighed equally for each of you,

because the Sun that brought you light and heat
possesses heat and light so equally
that no thing matches His equality;

whereas in mortals, word and sentiment—
to you, the cause of this is evident—
are wings whose featherings are disparate.

I — mortal — feel this inequality;
thus, it is only with my heart that I
can offer thanks for your paternal greeting

Indeed I do beseech you, living topaz,
set in this precious jewel as a gem:
fulfill my longing — let me know your name. "

"O you, my branch in whom I took delight
even awaiting you, I am your root,"
so he, in his reply to me, began,

then said: "The man who gave your family
its name, who for a century and more
has circled the first ledge of Purgatory,

was son to me and was your great — grandfather;
it is indeed appropriate for you
to shorten his long toil with your good works.

Florence, within her ancient ring of walls—
that ring from which she still draws tierce and nones—
sober and chaste, lived in tranquility.

No necklace and no coronal were there,
and no embroidered gowns; there was no girdle
that caught the eye more than the one who wore it.

No daughter's birth brought fear unto her father,
for age and dowry then did not imbalance—
to this side and to that — the proper measure.

There were no families that bore no children;
and Sardanapalus was still a stranger—
not come as yet to teach in the bedchamber.

Not yet had your Uccellatoio's rise
outdone the rise of Monte Mario,
which, too, will be outdone in its decline.

I saw Bellincione Berti girt
with leather and with bone, and saw his wife
come from her mirror with her face unpainted.

I saw dei Nerli and del Vecchio
content to wear their suits of unlined skins,
and saw their wives at spindle and at spool.

O happy wives! Each one was sure of her
own burial place, and none — for France's sake—
as yet was left deserted in her bed.

One woman watched with loving care the cradle
and, as she soothed her infant, used the way
of speech with which fathers and mothers play;

another, as she drew threads from the distaff,
would tell, among her household, tales of Trojans,
and tales of Fiesole, and tales of Rome.

A Lapo Salterello, a Cianghella,
would then have stirred as much dismay as now
a Cincinnatus and Cornelia would.

To such a life — so tranquil and so lovely—
of citizens in true community,
into so sweet a dwelling place did Mary,

invoked in pains of birth, deliver me;
and I, within your ancient Baptistery,
at once became Christian and Cacciaguida.

Moronto was my brother, and Eliseo;
my wife came from the valley of the Po—
the surname that you bear was brought by her.

In later years I served the Emperor
Conrad — and my good works so gained his favor
that he gave me the girdle of his knighthood.

I followed him to war against the evil
of that law whose adherents have usurped—
this, through your Pastors' fault — your just possessions.

There, by that execrable race, I was
set free from fetters of the erring world,
the love of which defiles so many souls.

From martyrdom I came unto this peace. "


## 16

If here below, where sentiment is far
too weak to withstand error, I should see
men glorying in you, nobility

of blood—a meager thing!—I should not wonder,
for even where desire is not awry,
I mean in Heaven, I too felt such pride.

You are indeed a cloak that soon wears out,
so that if, day by day, we add no patch,
then circling time will trim you with its shears.

My speech began again with you, the word
that Rome was the first city to allow,
although her people seldom speak it now;

at this word, Beatrice, somewhat apart,
smiling, seemed like the woman who had coughed—
so goes the tale—at Guinevere’s first fault.

So did my speech begin: “You are my father;
you hearten me to speak with confidence;
you raise me so that I am more than I.

So many streams have filled my mind with gladness—
so many, and such gladness, that mind must
rejoice that it can bear this and not burst.

Then tell me, founder of my family,
who were your ancestors and, in your boyhood,
what were the years the records registered;

and tell me of the sheepfold of St. John—
how numerous it was, who in that flock
were worthy of the highest offices.”

As at the breathing of the winds, a coal
will quicken into flame, so I saw that
light glow at words that were affectionate;

and as, before my eyes, it grew more fair,
so, with a voice more gentle and more sweet—
not in our modern speech—it said to me:

“Down from that day when Ave was pronounced,
until my mother (blessed now), by giving
birth, eased the burden borne in bearing me,

this fire of Mars had come five—hundred—fifty
and thirty more times to its Lion—there
to be rekindled underneath its paw.

My ancestors and I were born just where
the runner in your yearly games first comes
upon the boundary of the final ward.

That is enough concerning my forebears:
what were their names, from where they came—of that,
silence, not speech, is more appropriate.

All those who, at that time, between the Baptist
and Mars, were capable of bearing arms,
numbered one fifth of those who live there now.

But then the citizens, now mixed with Campi,
with the Certaldo, and with the Figline,
were pure down to the humblest artisan.

Oh, it would be far better if you had
those whom I mention as your neighbors (and
your boundaries at Galuzzo and Trespiano),

than to have them within, to bear the stench
of Aguglione’s wretch and Signa’s wretch,
whose sharp eyes now on barratry are set.

If those who, in the world, go most astray
had not seen Caesar with stepmothers’ eyes,
but, like a mother to her son, been kind,

then one who has become a Florentine
trader and money changer would have stayed
in Semifonte, where his fathers peddled,

the Counts would still be lords of Montemurlo,
the Cerchi would be in Acone’s parish,
perhaps the Buondelmonti in Valdigreve.

The mingling of the populations led
to evil in the city, even as
food piled on food destroys the body’s health;

the blind bull falls more quickly, more headlong,
than does the blind lamb; and the one blade can
often cut more and better than five swords.

Consider Luni, Urbisaglia, how
they went to ruin (Sinigaglia follows,
and Chiusi, too, will soon have vanished); then,

if you should hear of families undone,
you will find nothing strange or difficult
in that—since even cities meet their end.

All things that you possess, possess their death,
just as you do; but in some things that last
long, death can hide from you whose lives are short.

And even as the heaven of the moon,
revolving, respiteless, conceals and then
reveals the shores, so Fortune does with Florence;

therefore, there is no cause for wonder in
what I shall tell of noble Florentines,
of those whose reputations time has hidden.

I saw the Ughi, saw the Catellini,
Filippi, Greci, Ormanni, Alberichi,
famed citizens already in decline,

and saw, as great as they were venerable,
dell’Arca with della Sannella, and
Ardinghi, Soldanieri, and Bostichi.

Nearby the gate that now is burdened with
new treachery that weighs so heavily
that it will bring the vessel to shipwreck,

there were the Ravignani, from whose line
Count Guido comes and all who—since—derive
their name from the illustrious Bellincione.

And della Pressa knew already how
to rule; and Galigaio, in his house,
already had the gilded hilt and pommel.

The stripe of Vair had mightiness already,
as did the Giuochi, Galli, and Barucci,
Fifanti, and Sacchetti, and those who

blush for the bushel; and the stock from which
spring the Calfucci was already mighty,
and Sizzi and Arrigucci were already

raised to high office. Oh, how great were those
I saw—whom pride laid low! And the gold balls,
in all of her great actions, flowered Florence.

Such were the ancestors of those who now,
whenever bishops’ sees are vacant, grow
fat as they sit in church consistories.

The breed—so arrogant and dragonlike
in chasing him who flees, but lamblike, meek
to him who shows his teeth or else his purse—

was on the rise already, but of stock
so mean that Ubertin Donato, when
his father—in—law made him kin to them,

was scarcely pleased. Already Caponsacco
had come from Fiesole down to the market;
already citizens of note were Giuda

and Infangato. I shall tell a thing
incredible and true: the gateway through
the inner walls was named for the della Pera.

All those whose arms bear part of the fair ensign
of the great baron—he whose memory
and worth are honored on the feast of Thomas—

received knighthood and privilege from him,
though he whose coat of arms has fringed that ensign
has taken sides now with the populace.

The Gualterotti and the Importuni
were there already; were the Borgo spared
new neighbors, it would still be tranquil there.

The house of Amidei, with which your sorrows
began—by reason of its just resentment,
which ruined you and ended years of gladness—

was honored then, as were its close companions.
O Buondelmonte, through another’s counsel,
you fled your wedding pledge, and brought such evil!

Many would now rejoice, who still lament,
if when you first approached the city, God
had given you unto the river Ema!

But Florence, in her final peace, was fated
to offer up—unto that mutilated
stone guardian upon her bridge—a victim.

These were the families, and others with them:
the Florence that I saw—in such repose
that there was nothing to have caused her sorrow.

These were the families: with them I saw
her people so acclaimed and just, that on
her staff the lily never was reversed,

nor was it made bloodred by factious hatred.”


## 17

Like Phaethon (one who still makes fathers wary
of sons) when he had heard insinuations,
and he, to be assured, came to Clymene,

such was I and such was I seen to be
by Beatrice and by the holy lamp
that—earlier—had shifted place for me.

Therefore my lady said to me: “Display
the flame of your desire, that it may
be seen well—stamped with your internal seal,

not that we need to know what you’d reveal,
but that you learn the way that would disclose
your thirst, and you be quenched by what we pour.”

“O my dear root, who, since you rise so high,
can see the Point in which all times are present—
for just as earthly minds are able to

see that two obtuse angles cannot be
contained in a triangle, you can see
contingent things before they come to be—

while I was in the company of Virgil,
both on the mountain that heals souls and when
descending to the dead world, what I heard

about my future life were grievous words—
although, against the blows of chance I feel
myself as firmly planted as a cube.

Thus my desire would be appeased if I
might know what fortune is approaching me:
the arrow one foresees arrives more gently.”

So did I speak to the same living light
that spoke to me before; as Beatrice
had wished, what was my wish was now confessed.

Not with the maze of words that used to snare
the fools upon this earth before the Lamb
of God who takes away our sins was slain,

but with words plain and unambiguous,
that loving father, hidden, yet revealed
by his own smile, replied: “Contingency,

while not extending past the book in which
your world of matter has been writ, is yet
in the Eternal Vision all depicted

(but this does not imply necessity,
just as a ship that sails downstream is not
determined by the eye that watches it).

And from that Vision—just as from an organ
the ear receives a gentle harmony—
what time prepares for you appears to me.

Hippolytus was forced to leave his Athens
because of his stepmother, faithless, fierce;
and so must you depart from Florence: this

is willed already, sought for, soon to be
accomplished by the one who plans and plots
where—every day—Christ is both sold and bought.

The blame, as usual, will be cried out
against the injured party; but just vengeance
will serve as witness to the truth that wields it.

You shall leave everything you love most dearly:
this is the arrow that the bow of exile
shoots first. You are to know the bitter taste

of others’ bread, how salt it is, and know
how hard a path it is for one who goes
descending and ascending others’ stairs.

And what will be most hard for you to bear
will be the scheming, senseless company
that is to share your fall into this valley;

against you they will be insane, completely
ungrateful and profane; and yet, soon after,
not you but they will have their brows bloodred.

Of their insensate acts, the proof will be
in the effects; and thus, your honor will
be best kept if your party is your self.

Your first refuge and your first inn shall be
the courtesy of the great Lombard, he
who on the ladder bears the sacred bird;

and so benign will be his care for you
that, with you two, in giving and in asking,
that shall be first which is, with others, last.

You shall—beside him—see one who, at birth,
had so received the seal of this strong star
that what he does will be remarkable.

People have yet to notice him because
he is a boy—for nine years and no more
have these spheres wheeled around him—but before

the Gascon gulls the noble Henry, some
sparks will have marked the virtue of the Lombard:
hard labor and his disregard for silver.

His generosity is yet to be
so notable that even enemies
will never hope to treat it silently.

Put trust in him and in his benefits:
his gifts will bring much metamorphosis—
rich men and beggars will exchange their states.

What I tell you about him you will bear
inscribed within your mind—but hide it there”;
and he told things beyond belief even

for those who will yet see them. Then he added:
“Son, these are glosses of what you had heard;
these are the snares that hide beneath brief years.

Yet I’d not have you envying your neighbors;
your life will long outlast the punishment
that is to fall upon their treacheries.”

After that holy soul had, with his silence,
showed he was freed from putting in the woof
across the web whose warp I set for him,

I like a man who, doubting, craves for counsel
from one who sees and rightly wills and loves,
replied to him: “I clearly see, my father,

how time is hurrying toward me in order
to deal me such a blow as would be most
grievous for him who is not set for it;

thus, it is right to arm myself with foresight,
that if I lose the place most dear, I may
not lose the rest through what my poems say.

Down in the world of endless bitterness,
and on the mountain from whose lovely peak
I was drawn upward by my lady’s eyes,

and afterward, from light to light in Heaven,
I learned that which, if I retell it, must
for many have a taste too sharp, too harsh;

yet if I am a timid friend of truth,
I fear that I may lose my life among
those who will call this present, ancient times.”

The light in which there smiled the treasure I
had found within it, first began to dazzle,
as would a golden mirror in the sun,

then it replied: “A conscience that is dark—
either through its or through another’s shame—
indeed will find that what you speak is harsh.

Nevertheless, all falsehood set aside,
let all that you have seen be manifest,
and let them scratch wherever it may itch.

For if, at the first taste, your words molest,
they will, when they have been digested, end
as living nourishment. As does the wind,

so shall your outcry do—the wind that sends
its roughest blows against the highest peaks;
that is no little cause for claiming honor.

Therefore, within these spheres, upon the mountain,
and in the dismal valley, you were shown
only those souls that unto fame are known—

because the mind of one who hears will not
put doubt to rest, put trust in you, if given
examples with their roots unknown and hidden,

or arguments too dim, too unapparent.”

## 18

By now that blessed mirror was delighting
in its own inner words; I, tasting mine,
was tempering the bitter with the sweet.

But she, the lady leading me to God,
said: “Shift your thoughts: remember—I am close
to Him who lightens every unjust hurt.”

Hearing the loving sound my solace spoke,
I turned. But here I have to leave untold
what love I saw within her holy eyes,

not just because I do not trust my speech,
but, too, because recall cannot retrieve
that much, unless Another is its guide.

This only—of that moment—can I tell:
that even as I gazed at her, my soul
was free from any other need as long

as the Eternal Loveliness that shone
on Beatrice directly, from her eyes,
contented me with the reflected light.

But, conquering my will with her smile’s splendor,
she told me: “Turn to him and listen—for
not only in my eyes is Paradise.”

As, here on earth, at times our sentiment,
if it be passionate enough to take
the soul entirely, shows in the face,

so, in the flaming of the holy fire
to which I turned, I saw that he desired
some further words with me. And he began:

“In this fifth resting place, upon the tree
that grows down from its crown and endlessly
bears fruit and never loses any leaves,

are blessed souls that, down below, before
they came to heaven, were so notable
that any poem would be enriched by them.

Therefore look at the cross, along its horns:
those whom I name will race as swiftly as,
within a cloud, its rapid lightnings flash.”

Then, just as soon as Joshua was named,
I saw a splendor thrust along the cross,
nor did I note the name before the act.

And at the name of noble Maccabeus,
I saw another flame wheel round itself,
and gladness was the whip that spurred that top.

So, too, for Charlemagne and Roland—my
attentive eye held fast to that pair like
a falconer who tracks his falcon’s flight.

The next to draw my eyes along that cross
were William and Renouard and, too, Duke Godfrey
and Robert Guiscard. Then, when he had left me

and mingled with the other lights, the soul
who had addressed me showed his artistry,
singing among the singers in that sphere.

I turned to my right side to see if I
might see if Beatrice had signified
by word or gesture what I was to do

and saw such purity within her eyes,
such joy, that her appearance now surpassed
its guise at other times, even the last.

And as, by feeling greater joyousness
in doing good, a man becomes aware
that day by day his virtue is advancing,

so I became aware that my revolving
with heaven had increased its arc—by seeing
that miracle becoming still more brilliant.

And like the rapid change that one can see
in a pale woman’s face when it has freed
itself from bearing bashful modesty,

such change I, turning, saw: the red of Mars
was gone—and now the temperate sixth star’s
white heaven welcomed me into itself.

I saw within that torch of Jupiter
the sparkling of the love that it contained
design before my eyes the signs we speak.

And just as birds that rise from riverbanks,
as if rejoicing after feeding there,
will form a round flock or another shape,

so, in their lights, the saintly beings sang
and, in their flight, the figures that they spelled
were now a D, now I, and now an L.

First, they moved to the rhythm of their song;
then, after they had finished forming one
letter, they halted for a while, in silence.

O godly Pegasea, you who give
to genius glory and long life, as it,
through you, gives these to kingdoms and to cities,

give me your light that I may emphasize
these signs as I inscribed them in my mind:
your power—may it appear in these brief lines!

Those blessed spirits took the shape of five
times seven vowels and consonants, and I
noted the parts as they were spelled for me.

DILIGITE IUSTITIAM were the verb
and noun that first appeared in that depiction;
QUI IUDICATIS TERRAM followed after.

Then, having formed the M of the fifth word,
those spirits kept their order; Jupiter’s
silver, at that point, seemed embossed with gold.

And I saw other lights descending on
the apex of the M and, settling, singing—
I think—the Good that draws them to Itself.

Then, as innumerable sparks rise up
when one strikes burning logs (and in those sparks
fools have a way of reading auguries),

from that M seemed to surge more than a thousand
lights; and they climbed, some high, some low, just as
the Sun that kindles them assigned positions.

With each light settled quietly in place,
I saw that the array of fire had shaped
the image of an eagle’s head and neck.

He who paints there has no one as His guide:
He guides Himself; in Him we recognize
the shaping force that flows from nest to nest.

The other lights, who were, it seemed, content
at first to form a lily on the M,
moving a little, formed the eagle’s frame.

O gentle star, what—and how many—gems
made plain to me that justice here on earth
depends upon the heaven you engem!

Therefore I pray the Mind in which begin
your motion and your force, to watch that place
which has produced the smoke that dims your rays,

that once again His anger fall upon
those who would buy and sell within that temple
whose walls were built by miracles and martyrs.

O hosts of Heaven whom I contemplate,
for all who, led by bad example, stray
within the life they live on earth, do pray!

Men once were used to waging war with swords;
now war means seizing here and there the bread
the tender Father would deny to none.

But you who only write to then erase,
remember this: Peter and Paul, who died
to save the vines you spoil, are still alive.

Well may you say:”My longing is so bent
on him who chose the solitary life
and for a dance was dragged to martyrdom—

I do not know the Fisherman or Paul.”

## 19

The handsome image those united souls,
happy within their blessedness, were shaping,
appeared before me now with open wings.

Each soul seemed like a ruby—one in which
a ray of sun burned so, that in my eyes,
it was the total sun that seemed reflected.

And what I now must tell has never been
reported by a voice, inscribed by ink,
never conceived by the imagination;

for I did see the beak, did hear it speak
and utter with its voice both I and mine
when we and ours were what, in thought, was meant.

And it began: “Because I was both just
and merciful, I am exalted here
to glory no desire can surpass;

the memory I left on earth is such
that even the malicious praise it there,
although they do not follow its example.”

Thus one sole warmth is felt from many embers,
even as from a multitude of loves
one voice alone rose from the Eagle’s image.

To which I said: “O everlasting flowers
of the eternal gladness, who make all
your fragrances appear to me as one,

do let your breath deliver me from that
great fast which kept me hungering so long,
not finding any food for it on earth.

I know indeed that, though God’s Justice has
another realm in Heaven as Its mirror,
you here do not perceive it through a veil.

You know how keenly I prepare myself
to listen, and you know what is that doubt
which caused so old a hungering in me.”

Just like a falcon set free from its hood,
which moves its head and flaps its wings, displaying
its eagerness and proud appearance, so

I saw that ensign do, that Eagle woven
of praises of God’s grace, accompanied
by songs whose sense those up above enjoy.

Then it began: “The One who turned His compass
to mark the world’s confines, and in them set
so many things concealed and things revealed,

could not imprint His Power into all
the universe without His Word remaining
in infinite excess of such a vessel.

In proof of this, the first proud being, he
who was the highest of all creatures, fell—
unripe because he did not wait for light.

Thus it is clear that every lesser nature
is—all the more—too meager a container
for endless Good, which is Its own sole measure.

In consequence of this, your vision—which
must be a ray of that Intelligence
with which all beings are infused—cannot

of its own nature find sufficient force
to see into its origin beyond
what God himself makes manifest to man;

therefore, the vision that your world receives
can penetrate into Eternal Justice
no more than eye can penetrate the sea;

for though, near shore, sight reaches the sea floor,
you cannot reach it in the open sea;
yet it is there, but hidden by the deep.

Only the light that shines from the clear heaven
can never be obscured—all else is darkness
or shadow of the flesh or fleshly poison.

Now is the hiding place of living Justice
laid open to you—where it had been hidden
while you addressed it with insistent questions.

For you would say: ‘A man is born along
the shoreline of the Indus River; none
is there to speak or teach or write of Christ.

And he, as far as human reason sees,
in all he seeks and all he does is good:
there is no sin within his life or speech.

And that man dies unbaptized, without faith.
Where is this justice then that would condemn him?
Where is his sin if he does not believe?’

Now who are you to sit upon the bench,
to judge events a thousand miles away,
when your own vision spans so brief a space?

Of course, for him who would be subtle with me,
were there no Scriptures to instruct you, then
there would be place for an array of questions.

O earthly animals, o minds obtuse!
The Primal Will, which of Itself is good,
from the Supreme Good—Its Self—never moved.

So much is just as does accord with It;
and so, created good can draw It to
itself—but It, rayed forth, causes such goods.”

Just as, above the nest, the stork will circle
when she has fed her fledglings, and as he
whom she has fed looks up at her, so did

the blessed image do, and so did I,
the fledgling, while the Eagle moved its wings,
spurred on by many wills in unison.

Wheeling, the Eagle sang, then said: “Even
as are my songs to you—past understanding—
such is Eternal Judgment to you mortals.”

After the Holy Ghost’s bright flames fell silent
while still within the sign that made the Romans
revered throughout the world, again the Eagle

began: “No one without belief in Christ
has ever risen to this kingdom—either
before or after He was crucified.

But there are many who now cry ‘Christ! Christ!’
who at the Final Judgment shall be far
less close to Him than one who knows not Christ;

the Ethiopian will shame such Christians
when the two companies are separated,
the one forever rich, the other poor.

What shall the Persians, when they come to see
that open volume in which they shall read
the misdeeds of your rulers, say to them?

There one shall see, among the deeds of Albert,
that which is soon to set the pen in motion,
his making of a desert of Prague’s kingdom.

There one shall see the grief inflicted on
the Seine by him who falsifies his coins,
one who shall die beneath a wild boar’s blow.

There one shall see the thirst of arrogance
that drives the Scot and Englishman insane—
unable to remain within their borders.

That book will show the life of Lechery
and ease the Spaniard led—and the Bohemian,
who never knew and never wished for valor.

That book will show the Cripple of Jerusalem—
his good deeds labeled with an I alone,
whereas his evils will be under M.

That book will show the greed and cowardice
of him who oversees the Isle of Fire,
on which Anchises ended his long life;

and to make plain his paltriness, the letters
that register his deeds will be contracted,
to note much pettiness in little space.

And all shall see the filthiness of both
his uncle and his brother, who dishonored
a family so famous—and two crowns.

And he of Portugal and he of Norway
shall be known in that book, and he of Rascia,
who saw—unluckily—the coin of Venice.

O happy Hungary, if she would let
herself be wronged no more! Happy Navarre,
if mountains that surround her served as armor!

And if Navarre needs token of her future,
now Nicosia and Famagosta offer—
as men must see—lament and anger over

their own beast, with his place beside the others.”

## 20

When he who graces all the world with light
has sunk so far below our hemisphere
that on all sides the day is spent, the sky,

which had been lit before by him alone,
immediately shows itself again
with many lights reflecting one same source,

and I remembered this celestial course
when, in the blessed beak, the emblem of
the world and of its guardians fell silent;

for then all of those living lights grew more
resplendent, but the songs that they began
were labile—they escape my memory.

O gentle love that wears a smile as mantle,
how ardent was your image in those torches
filled only with the breath of holy thoughts!

After the precious, gleaming jewels with which
the sixth of Heaven’s heavens was engemmed
had ended their angelic song in silence,

I seemed to hear the murmur of a torrent
that, limpid, falls from rock to rock, whose flow
shows the abundance of its mountain source.

Even as sound takes shape at the lute’s neck,
and even as the wind that penetrates
the blow—hole of the bagpipe, so—with no

delay—that murmur of the Eagle rose
straight up, directly through its neck as if
its neck were hollow; and that murmuring

became a voice that issued from its beak,
taking the shape of words desired by
my heart—and that is where they were transcribed.

“Now you must watch—and steadily—that part
of me that can, in mortal eagles, see
and suffer the sun’s force,” it then began

to say to me, “because, of all the flames
from which I shape my form, those six with which
the eye in my head glows hold highest rank.

He who gleams in the center, my eye’s pupil—
he was the singer of the Holy Spirit,
who bore the ark from one town to another;

now he has learned the merit will can earn—
his song had not been spurred by grace alone,
but his own will, in part, had urged him on.

Of those five flames that, arching, form my brow,
he who is nearest to my beak is one
who comforted the widow for her son;

now he has learned the price one pays for not
following Christ, through his experience
of this sweet life and of its opposite.

And he whose place is next on the circumference
of which I speak, along the upward arc,
delayed his death through truthful penitence;

now he has learned that the eternal judgment
remains unchanged, though worthy prayer below
makes what falls due today take place tomorrow.

The next who follows—one whose good intention
bore evil fruit—to give place to the Shepherd,
with both the laws and me, made himself Greek;

now he has learned that, even though the world
be ruined by the evil that derives
from his good act, that evil does not harm him.

He whom you see—along the downward arc—
was William, and the land that mourns his death,
for living Charles and Frederick, now laments;

now he has learned how Heaven loves the just
ruler, and he would show this outwardly
as well, so radiantly visible.

Who in the erring world below would hold
that he who was the fifth among the lights
that formed this circle was the Trojan Ripheus?

Now he has learned much that the world cannot
discern of God’s own grace, although his sight
cannot divine, not reach its deepest site.”

As if it were a lark at large in air,
a lark that sings at first and then falls still,
content with final sweetness that fulfills,

such seemed to me the image of the seal
of that Eternal Pleasure through whose will
each thing becomes the being that it is.

And though the doubt I felt there was as plain
as any colored surface cloaked by glass,
it could not wait to voice itself, but with

the thrust and weight of urgency it forced
“Can such things be?” out from my lips, at which
I saw lights flash—a vast festivity.

And then the blessed sign—its eye grown still
more bright—replied, that I might not be kept
suspended in amazement: “I can see

that, since you speak of them, you do believe
these things but cannot see how they may be;
and thus, though you believe them, they are hidden.

You act as one who apprehends a thing
by name but cannot see its quiddity
unless another set it forth to him.

Regnum celorum suffers violence
from ardent love and living hope, for these
can be the conquerors of Heaven’s Will;

yet not as man defeats another man:
the Will of God is won because It would
be won and, won, wins through benevolence.

You were amazed to see the angels’ realm
adorned with those who were the first and fifth
among the living souls that form my eyebrow.

When these souls left their bodies, they were not
Gentiles—as you believe—but Christians, one
with firm faith in the Feet that suffered, one

in Feet that were to suffer. One, from Hell,
where there is no returning to right will,
returned to his own bones, as the reward

bestowed upon a living hope, the hope
that gave force to the prayers offered God
to resurrect him and convert his will.

Returning briefly to the flesh, that soul
in glory—he of whom I speak—believed
in Him whose power could help him and, believing,

was kindled to such fire of true love
that, when he died a second death, he was
worthy to join in this festivity.

The other, through the grace that surges from
a well so deep that no created one
has ever thrust his eye to its first source,

below, set all his love on righteousness,
so that, through grace on grace, God granted him
the sight of our redemption in the future;

thus he, believing that, no longer suffered
the stench of paganism and rebuked
those who persisted in that perverse way.

More than a thousand years before baptizing,
to baptize him there were the same three women
you saw along the chariot’s right—hand side.

How distant, o predestination, is
your root from those whose vision does not see
the Primal Cause in Its entirety!

And, mortals, do take care—judge prudently:
for we, though we see God, do not yet know
all those whom He has chosen; but within

the incompleteness of our knowledge is
a sweetness, for our good is then refined
in this good, since what God wills, we too will.”

So, from the image God Himself had drawn,
what I received was gentle medicine;
and I saw my shortsightedness plainly.

And as a lutanist accompanies—
expert—with trembling strings, the expert singer,
by which the song acquires sweeter savor,

so, while the Eagle spoke—I can remember—
I saw the pair of blessed lights together,
like eyes that wink in concord, move their flames

in ways that were at one with what he said.
